MAGE-TAB Version	1.1
Investigation Title	Predictive design of sigma factor-specific promoters

Experimental Design	genotype design
Experimental Design Term Source REF	EFO
Experimental Design Term Accession Number	EFO:0001748

Experimental Factor Name	genomic measurement
Experimental Factor Type	genomic measurement
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	EFO
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number	EFO_0004554

Person Last Name	Clauwaert	Van Brempt	De Mey
Person First Name	Jim	Maarten	Marjan
Person Mid Initials
Person Email	jimclauwaert@gmail.com	maarten.vanbrempt@ugent.be	marjan.demey@ugent.be
Person Phone
Person Fax
Person Affiliation	KERMIT Ghent University	MEMO group Ghent University	MEMO group Ghent University
Person Address
Person Roles	data analyst;data coder;submitter	experiment performer
Person Roles Term Source REF
Person Roles Term Accession Number

Quality Control Type
Quality Control Term Source REF
Quality Control Term Accession Number

Replicate Type
Replicate Term Source REF
Replicate Term Accession Number

Normalization Type
Normalization Term Source REF
Normalization Term Accession Number

Date of Experiment	2018-09-19
Public Release Date	2020-08-01

PubMed ID
Publication DOI
Publication Author List
Publication Title
Publication Status
Publication Status Term Source REF
Publication Status Term Accession Number

Experiment Description	To engineer synthetic gene circuits, molecular building blocks are developed which can modulate gene expression without interference, mutually or with the host’s cell machinery. Promoter libraries of E. coli sigma factor 70  and B. subtilis B-, F- and W-dependent promoters are exploited to construct prediction models, capable of both predicting promoter TIF and orthogonality of the specific promoters. This is achieved by the creation of high-throughput DNA sequencing data from fluorescence-activated cell sorted promoter libraries.

Protocol Name	P-MTAB-93260	P-MTAB-93262	P-MTAB-93261	P-MTAB-93263
Protocol Type	sample collection protocol	nucleic acid library construction protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	nucleic acid sequencing protocol
Protocol Term Source REF	EFO	EFO	EFO	EFO
Protocol Term Accession Number	EFO_0005518	EFO_0004184	EFO_0002944	EFO_0004170
Protocol Description	Plasmid libraries were transformed by electroporation into the E. coli K12 MG1655. All strains were cultured overnight (12 h) at 30°C in 5 ml selective 853 medium. Cultures were then resuspended and diluted in filtered phosphate-buffered saline for cell sorting. A BD Influx Cell Sorter (FACS core facility, cmpg, Leuven), calibrated with Rainbow Calibration Particles (8 peaks, 3.0 – 3.4 µm)(BD), was used for cell sorting to split the libraries into separate bins, according to the different promoter TIF levels. Constitutive sfGFP expression was taken into account for bin selection to exclude artifacts. Sorted cells were collected in collection tubes with 1 mL 853 medium supplemented with kanamycin. Subsequently, sorted cells were added to 5 mL fresh 853 medium supplemented with kanamycin in 50 mL tubes and incubated overnight at 30 °C while shaking.	Libraries were constructed using standard molecular cloning protocols. Randomized DNA sequences were included in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers. CPEC is used subsequently to construct a plasmid. The cloning vector (pLibrary) is based on the pSC101 plasmid and additionally contains a constitutively expressed sfGFP gene. The assembled plasmids were transformed in electrocompetent Top10 cells and subsequently grown overnight in 10 ml selective LB medium at 37°C. Plasmid DNA was extracted for all individual libraries with a Qiagen Plasmid Mini Kit.	Plasmid DNA was isolated for all individual bins with a Qiagen Plasmid Mini Kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) to prepare for DNA sequencing.	The followed sample preparation workflow for sequencing of the sorted libraries, is adapted from the ‘16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation’ protocol (Illumina Inc.). The 2-step PCR workflow creates amplicons of the region of interest in a first PCR reaction and includes a primer binding site for a second PCR reaction, adding sample-specific indexes and sequencer flow cell binding sites for subsequent sequencing.  Plasmid template concentrations were determined using a Quant-iT™ PicoGreen™ dsDNA Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). 0.7 ng template and 0.15 µM of each primer was added to 40 µL PrimeSTAR® HS (Takara Bio Inc.) PCR reactions to produce amplicons of 270-275 bp. A DNA Clean & Concentrator Kit (Zymo Research) was used for DNA purification after the first PCR, and amplicons were analyzed on a LabChip GX (PerkinElmer Inc.). PCR conditions were optimized for each primer pair to ensure a DNA yield of minimum 1 ng/µL.  For index PCR reactions, a Nextera XT Index Kit (Illumina Inc.) and the KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd) were used. Each sample was tagged with a unique pair of indexes. Subsequent DNA purification was performed using AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter Inc.), followed by LabChip analysis to determine amplicon concentrations. Samples were pooled together proportionally with the number of sorted cells for each bin and taking into account the theoretical maximum amount of unique sequences for each library (= #transformants during library construction). To remove potential excess index primers and off-target amplicons, a DNA size-specific gel purification was performed (Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit, Zymo Research). Finally, quality control and sequencing (dual-index, single-read 50 bp sequencing, MiSeq, Illumina) was performed by the NXTGNT lab (Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, UGent).
Protocol Parameters
Protocol Hardware				Illumina MiSeq
Protocol Software
Protocol Contact

Term Source Name	EFO	ArrayExpress
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/
Term Source Version	2.38

SDRF File	E-MTAB-8734.sdrf.txt
Comment [TemplateType]	High-throughput sequencing
Comment [Submitted Name]	Predictive design of sigma factor-specific promoters
Comment [SecondaryAccession]	ERP119626
Comment [SequenceDataURI]	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/ERR3841656-ERR3841721
Comment [AEExperimentType]	DNA-seq
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-MTAB-8734